@node x86 (PC) System emulator
@section x86 (PC) System emulator
@cindex system emulation (PC)

@menu
* pcsys_devices::      Peripherals
* cpu_models_x86::     CPU models
* pcsys_req::          OS requirements
@end menu

@node pcsys_devices
@subsection Peripherals

@c man begin DESCRIPTION

The QEMU PC System emulator simulates the following peripherals:

@itemize @minus
@item
i440FX host PCI bridge and PIIX3 PCI to ISA bridge
@item
Cirrus CLGD 5446 PCI VGA card or dummy VGA card with Bochs VESA
extensions (hardware level, including all non standard modes).
@item
PS/2 mouse and keyboard
@item
2 PCI IDE interfaces with hard disk and CD-ROM support
@item
Floppy disk
@item
PCI and ISA network adapters
@item
Serial ports
@item
IPMI BMC, either and internal or external one
@item
Creative SoundBlaster 16 sound card
@item
ENSONIQ AudioPCI ES1370 sound card
@item
Intel 82801AA AC97 Audio compatible sound card
@item
Intel HD Audio Controller and HDA codec
@item
Adlib (OPL2) - Yamaha YM3812 compatible chip
@item
Gravis Ultrasound GF1 sound card
@item
CS4231A compatible sound card
@item
PCI UHCI, OHCI, EHCI or XHCI USB controller and a virtual USB-1.1 hub.
@end itemize

SMP is supported with up to 255 CPUs.

QEMU uses the PC BIOS from the Seabios project and the Plex86/Bochs LGPL
VGA BIOS.

QEMU uses YM3812 emulation by Tatsuyuki Satoh.

QEMU uses GUS emulation (GUSEMU32 @url{http://www.deinmeister.de/gusemu/})
by Tibor "TS" Schütz.

Note that, by default, GUS shares IRQ(7) with parallel ports and so
QEMU must be told to not have parallel ports to have working GUS.

@example
@value{qemu_system_x86} dos.img -soundhw gus -parallel none
@end example

Alternatively:
@example
@value{qemu_system_x86} dos.img -device gus,irq=5
@end example

Or some other unclaimed IRQ.

CS4231A is the chip used in Windows Sound System and GUSMAX products

@c man end

@lowersections
@include docs/system/cpu-models-x86.texi
@raisesections

@node pcsys_req
@subsection OS requirements

On x86_64 hosts, the default set of CPU features enabled by the KVM accelerator
require the host to be running Linux v4.5 or newer.  Red Hat Enterprise Linux
7 is also supported, since the required functionality was backported.

