@node PowerPC System emulator
@section PowerPC System emulator

Use the executable @file{qemu-system-ppc} to simulate a complete 40P (PREP)
or PowerMac PowerPC system.

QEMU emulates the following PowerMac peripherals:

@itemize @minus
@item
UniNorth or Grackle PCI Bridge
@item
PCI VGA compatible card with VESA Bochs Extensions
@item
2 PMAC IDE interfaces with hard disk and CD-ROM support
@item
NE2000 PCI adapters
@item
Non Volatile RAM
@item
VIA-CUDA with ADB keyboard and mouse.
@end itemize

QEMU emulates the following 40P (PREP) peripherals:

@itemize @minus
@item
PCI Bridge
@item
PCI VGA compatible card with VESA Bochs Extensions
@item
2 IDE interfaces with hard disk and CD-ROM support
@item
Floppy disk
@item
PCnet network adapters
@item
Serial port
@item
PREP Non Volatile RAM
@item
PC compatible keyboard and mouse.
@end itemize

Since version 0.9.1, QEMU uses OpenBIOS @url{https://www.openbios.org/}
for the g3beige and mac99 PowerMac and the 40p machines. OpenBIOS is a free
(GPL v2) portable firmware implementation. The goal is to implement a 100%
IEEE 1275-1994 (referred to as Open Firmware) compliant firmware.

@c man begin OPTIONS

The following options are specific to the PowerPC emulation:

@table @option

@item -g @var{W}x@var{H}[x@var{DEPTH}]

Set the initial VGA graphic mode. The default is 800x600x32.

@item -prom-env @var{string}

Set OpenBIOS variables in NVRAM, for example:

@example
qemu-system-ppc -prom-env 'auto-boot?=false' \
 -prom-env 'boot-device=hd:2,\yaboot' \
 -prom-env 'boot-args=conf=hd:2,\yaboot.conf'
@end example

@end table

@c man end


More information is available at
@url{http://perso.magic.fr/l_indien/qemu-ppc/}.

